---
title: Getting Distracted With Plastic
date: 2019-18-03
permalink: /getting-distracted-with-plastic/
tags:
  - Uncategorized
---

“Single-use” was the [Collins word of the year](https://www.collinsdictionary.com/woty) for 2018, reflecting widespread public concerning the volume of plastic being thrown away, and invariably ending up in the oceans. The response has been impressive with people making real change in their day-to-day lives and consumer pressure starting to force changes in supermarkets. [Co-op recently](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-45612315) announced they would introduce compostable carrier  bags that can be re-used for food waste. However, as with all sustainability issues, it’s never as simple as “x is bad, so let’s replace x with y”. Indeed, in this case I (and a growing number of others) fear we are stuck in a dogmatic rejection of plastic, and as a result losing sight of the key issues. It’s notable that the [only environmental announcement in the last UK budget related to single-use plastics](https://www.greenparty.org.uk/news/2018/10/29/caroline-lucas-budget-a-slap-in-the-face-for-headteachers/).

# In defence of plastic
Crucially, plastic is not in itself unsustainable. At least the alternatives are not necessarily any better. Furthermore, new, plastic containing composites will no-doubt play an important role in the eco-innovations which could help build a more sustainable society. Thus, I contend that the current “war on plastic” is somewhat misguided. This is in the same way that branding fat as unhealthy was not completely wrong, but missed the point that sugar was a far bigger problem and that fats perform an important and healthy party of a healthy diet. Much like fats, we currently use far too much plastic, but it’s not inherently bad, and may have an important role to play in more sustainable futures.
Paper bags? Cotton Bags?

There’s been lots of work to reduce plastic use, not least the 5p plastic bag charge. This has encouraged the use of more durable bags for life but a recent study suggested this could actually have increased overall plastic usage as we are failing to . Other shops might use paper or cotton alternatives, but depending on the number of re-uses, these are not necessarily better. According to an [environment agency study](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/291023/scho0711buan-e-e.pdf), To have the same global warming impact as a single-use plastic bag:
- A paper bag must be re-used three times.
- A more durable LDPE bag must be re-used 4 times.
- A cotton bag must be re-used a whopping 131 times.

Obviously this ignores the key plastic waste issues, but it also shows how these initiatives involve so-called sustainable choices are made without attention to the evidence. Next time you get offered a paper bag for a couple of organic carrots you just bought turn if down and pull out 
An infuriating example of this was at the end of Oxford Half Marathon where we were handed an aluminium [CanOWater](https://www.canowater.com/), labelled on the side with claims of greater sustainability by using aluminium rather than plastic. Aluminium is a more sustainable alternative to plastic for packaging IF it is recycled and does have very high rates of recycling, rather than downcycled as is the case with plastic. However, I proceeded to walk past bin after bin overflowing with these metal cans, set for landfill. Metal extraction and processing is highly energy intensive process. Collection, recycling and redistribution is also energy demanding. Debating the relative merits of metal and plastic for packaging water is completely missing the point though. The problem is not which packaging we are using to package and distribute water, but that we are packaging water in the first place.
# What about all these “sustainable alternatives”?
We’ve seen a lot of development in bio-based plastics in recent years. In my view, bio-plastics offer long-term alternatives for the production of high-end plastics, but they must not be used as a licence to legitimise wasteful consumerism. [As Mombiot puts it](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/sep/06/save-earth-disposable-coffee-cup-green): “The problem is not just plastic: it is mass disposability”. Compostable cups are one of the worst examples of this in my mind, effectively legitimising our disposable lifestyles. Indeed, composting packaging is a [wasteful way to deal with our waste](https://quantis-intl.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/life_cycle_assessment_of_end-of-life_options_for_t.pdf), as it neither re-uses the material or energy embedded in the producing the packaging, encouraging a linear, rather than circular approach to packaging. Remember the three R’s (reduce, reuse, recycle) – if you put biodegrade in there it would come at the end. This is of course assuming that these plastics make it to the industrial facilities required for their degredation. [PLA will still take 100s or 1000s of years to decompose in a landfill](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/environmental-impact-of-corn-based-plastics/). 
# What can we do?
This is not a plea to stop being bothered about sustainability. The growing interest in making sustainable choices is inspiring and promising. All of these cases that I’ve described involve people trying to do good but demonstrate the problem with trying to find easy fixes to single issues without considering the bigger picture and the pitfalls in not considering how people use and dispose of materials in reality. In all these cases the evidence was out there.
We need a bit more healthy scepticism. Furthermore, we need to stop getting distracted with single issues. The sustainability challenge we face is highly complex requiring a complex, multifaceted and system-wide response. So lets keep working to live more sustainable lives, and more importantly, vote and lobby to ensure our politicians take the necessary (and hard) high-level decisions. In the words of Albert Einstein: 
*Learn from yesterday, live for today, hope for tomorrow. The important thing is not to stop questioning.* – Albert Einstein
